So I have to admit something in the last lecture I lied I'm not going to give you five red flags to
look for.
I'm actually going to give you six.
So enjoy the bonus tip.
In my experience a lot of people graze over what I consider effectively on our minds.
Things that are going to blow up later and I think that there are a lot of red flags that you might
skip over because you don't have a lot of experience with this.
There are also a lot of things when it comes to selecting your freelancer that you might be a little
wofully on because you're new to this you're not sure how I should interpret something while I'm going
to interject my opinion to give you a little bit of guidance.
Take it for what it's worth.
The first thing I would say is number one if the person that I'm talking to when I'm trying to build
my shortlist says that they don't have skype or they don't offer that that is a red flag for me that's
just odd to me.
I think it's very strange that they don't use Skype and they are contracting.
That means to me that they don't have a lot of experience contracting or they're not realistic about
how much kind of connectivity this project's going to require.
Typically the best way of hashing someone out is ask for their Skype.
You can talk on skype have a real time conversation.
Personally I don't like to video Skype with all of my contractors I just would get a little onerous.
It would take a little bit too much time.
I like to just tech Skype message and having a quick conversation with them.
You can get a feel for how competent you think they are how interested they are and the other five criteria
that we listed in the previous lecture.
No Skype.
I consider that a red flag especially if they say no I don't have one.
Or are you asked for it.
They don't give it to you.
That's weird.
You need to have real time feedback.
You're not going to run this project through messages on Elance or oDesk.
The second one I kind of touched on this a little bit last time Miss description's you know it's nice
that a lot of people will put some time into their responses in their bid but actually read it and make
sure that there's nothing in there that's completely off.
I've had actually many many instances where someone sounds like a good applicant but in a one sentence
in what they responded to my thing makes no sense.
I've had outsourcing a web application and the contractor kept calling it a mobile application.
I don't know what that says to you but that says to me they weren't paying attention or maybe they're
just not that good.
Well there are a lot of things that make a good developer.
One of them is attention to detail and if they didn't pick up on that they might be over stressed maybe
they're overworked.
Regardless it's just not something that I want and my project number three.
Are they overly anxious to start the project.
You'll notice this special freelancer dot.com and freelance dotcom there are too many freelancers.
There are seven million of them versus oDesk which was point something.
And what'll happen is they kind of have this problem where it feels like the squeaky wheel gets the
grease.
They have to shout to get noticed.
So a lot of times you have people that are anxious to start the project.
They're like yes yes whatever you say it's fantastic.
Let's do this.
A lot of them will be very active about getting you off of the Web site.
And the first message is I'll say I can do this.
Contact me on Skype or something like that.
I'm not saying don't engage with them but that is a red flag for me.
That is just too strange for me.
It means that they're not very mature.
It means that they're trying to do a quick grab means that they're probably not realistic about what
your project is going to take.
Number four like all this sycophant is I'm going to put that word up on the board.
Here's the definition for me.
That is a feature of outsourcing.
Contractors quite often don't know what it is.
I think it's a cultural disconnect that in some countries they think that the way that you get projects
is by being overly formal or overly ingratiating.
Oftentimes you will get these flowery letters that they write to you that are way too over-the-top to
spending too much time on platitudes.
It almost comes off like one of those Nigerian scam letters.
Dear great honorable sir.
I have heard of you from such and such.
I believe you are trustworthy and intelligent person.
That's odd.
I just posted a job.
Chill out.
That is a red flag for me.
That means to me that they are actively looking for projects but it appears that they're losing and
they're not getting the projects that they want so they're just lathering on the compliments and the
I can do anything sir.
Attitude don't obviously mistake some of the cultural conventions for being a sycophant sometimes with
Indian developers specifically.
They will often just call you sir even if you're a woman or they'll call you Miss or missus if you're
not married they will always call you Mrs..
But that is just something that they do.
You need to be able to tell distinction between that and that is just a convention that they use and
it's just something that's kind of brainless for them they just type it and whether or not they're trying
to lather on compliments to get your business.
Those are two different things.
One of the red flags that I think you should pay attention to is what is your gut feeling when you look
at their portfolio.
If you don't have a lot of bids on your project and you go and look at their portfolio and saying the
graphic design on them are not so great or say the Web sites you've been to are a little too low quality
a little too basic.
Yeah you're just not sure.
Now follow the rule.
It goes with bad meat.
It's when in doubt throw it out and I apply that towards software programs.
What I mean by that is say you look at their portfolio and like two or three things you think look good
do you think fit.
Then you see three or four that don't at all don't have this kind of confirmation bias where you just
assume that those three that you didn't like oh those are the client's problem.
You don't think that that represents the freelancer.
That's not the truth.
I mean you should look at it from the other way around.
When in doubt throw it out just say not worth it if you have any questions about their ability to create
something that you're happy with.
At the end Hemingses if you look at the portfolio move along and the six the one this one actually I'm
referring back to the five criteria were the last two it was availability and responsiveness.
Well these are actually interrelated.
You need to tell whether or not their availability matches their responsiveness.
If they say they have a lot of availability and they're not being responsive that means for me that
they're not telling the truth.
For me that's a little bit odd that they have all this free time but they're not dedicating it to projects
they're not dedicating it to at least communication.
There are a lot of free time.
I mean they probably could take on more projects why aren't they spending more time.
That's a mismatch for me.
And then the inverse of that is are they super responsive but also incredibly busy.
I don't feel great about that.
That means that they might be exaggerating about how busy they are they might be hedging by saying they
don't have as much time.
So that allows them to underperform on your project and deliver it late.
That's what I've seen before.
And so this is going to take a month.
Really they're not actually that busy they just want to give themselves a comfortable runway.
I don't like it you shouldn't like it.
So those are six things that I've noticed repeatedly that will pop up.
You'll probably run into them and hopefully now you can recognize them.